Would
you explain how you acquired your early interest
in oceanography and your early academic
training? Yeah, my early academic training was as
an undergraduate in physics.
The war came along, and I was teaching V-12 Navy
students mathematics. I was also interested in
graduate school in astronomy, and so I had a
navigation course to teach. Now, where was this?
Yeah, and the navigation course kind of got me
interested in oceanography. I think that's
basically it. Well, the first time I come in
contact with your career, you were at Scripps. No,
I was never at Scripps. You didn't go to Scripps and
worked him in 40? No, I was in Scripps for the summer
of 1949 once. Before that, I don't think I ever was
at Scripps. My impression was that you appeared
there briefly in 40. I suppose I got that from Roger
Revelle. I think he's wrong. In 40, I don't think
I... I certainly had never heard of oceanography
before. I thought it was chemistry or something
like that. And
then I was looking around for something a little
bit more active to do, and Lyman Spitzer, who was
the professor of astrophysics at Yale, whom I'd
known before Pearl Harbor, had gone to work in
underwater sound work, and so he suggested I might
come to Woods Hole. and that was 1944, and he,
because I had already got this interest in
navigation and so forth, it was quite an
interesting opportunity for me to come to its own,
see something firsthand about ships and work at
sea and so forth. That was first working in a
project for Morris Ewing, on the shallow
thermoclines and the acoustic tracking on the
upper layers. And I don't think I made out too well
in that because the viewing somehow didn't
communicate very well what it was he was doing. He
was terribly busy. And after about six months of
that, I think it was something like that, I started
to work with Alan Vaughn, for Alan Vaughn. on
constructing some new kinds of repeating smoke
glass, battery thermo-grass. And I was working
for him probably for a total of two years,
something like that. and then started to work for
Jeffries Wyman, who was a physiologist from
Harvard who was working here on clouds, cumulus
clouds.
I think until I met Wyman, I had no idea about a
scientific paper or how to really do any
scientific research. Before that, it was being a
technical assistant. And it was working with
Wyman that gave me some idea about how you ask
questions, and how you formulate models, and
something about the scientific
literature, which I didn't have any idea about
before at all. That probably worked more or less in
Wyman's projects up until 1947, probably. No, but
when you were working with thermoclimes, you were
working with any submarine warfare, is that
right? Well, yes, that's what it was. For that
first half year or a year, I guess, altogether, if
you include the bath and thermograph stuff, maybe
a year and a half. Then the world was over, and most
of the people who were here A large number of them
decided, I think, that there was really very
little professional future in oceanography, and
they all disappeared. Some went back to
universities to teach basic subjects, and others
went down to Navy laboratories in southern Spain,
but only a very few stayed here, by comparison. I
think 1949, 1950 was a low point in the population
of the Asian Graffiti Institution. When did you
first become interested in waves,
though? Well, I guess I've never been interested
in, very much, in surface waves. I was interested,
the work I did that had anything to do with waves was
very low frequency, raspy waves in the ocean. That
was probably, I don't know, I think that was about
1955, 57, something like that. And, but as far as
surface waves are concerned, or internal waves,
high frequency stuff, I really, I don't think I've
ever written any paper at all, except one, a
retracted paper that I wrote for a Russian journal
called Duklady, 1950, I think it was. And after I
discovered that the The paper had been, the
material in the paper had really been worked out
much earlier by Osmond Reynolds. I wrote a, sent a
telegram to them asking them to either just to
withdraw the paper or to,
to destroy it. So it was a long period, then finally
a telegram came from Mackey Radio, which said,
which the secretary of the institution brought in
rather tremblingly and said, Mr. Stommel, per
your instructions, the papers have been
destroyed. Krylov and Boguglia, something like
that. Moscow. That was just the time of the
McCarthy hearings and so forth, so we were kind of a
little bit scared what was going to happen, but
evidently it slipped through the CIA and FBI net.
Never heard anything about it. They probably
still have a file. I don't know. I think that
they're not very efficient. I don't think they
ever picked that one up. It never came up on any kind
of... clearance or anything like that over the
many years. What was Woods Hole like in those early
years? Well, it was confined to that one building.
When I first came here, there were German
prisoners of war cleaning up after the 1944
hurricane. And both of our ships, which were kind
of small ships, the original Lattice and the
Saluda, I think it was, were up the ground on Ram
Island.
And we pulled off. And everything was in that one
building. There was quite a few small buildings on
the docks. The heavy emphasis on explosive work,
testing of different kinds of charges against
model submarine hulls, that was a big problem.
Because the Navy 7 was gone. And then there was the
smaller acoustic program, which Ewing was
carrying out mostly. And there were some
biological programs about anti-fouling paint
and about trying to reduce foam and see nine tubes
in the wakes of landing craft when they were
visible, things like that.
where they got great big suitcases full of blue
ration stamps to buy
meat and all. It was a very different place than it
is now. People were, although it was a very
intense, dedicated activity in connection with
war effort, and people were working there. long
hours on the weekends and so forth, and I think
there was an exceptionally high morale at the
place at that time. The feeling of having to
accomplish something every day. I think
basically the level of industry perhaps twice
what it is today. If you walk around in the relaxed
atmosphere of our laboratory today, compared to
the intense activity at that time, it was much,
much harder work going on. Of course, we didn't
have any large
ships like the Atlantis, so we left the Atlantis
too. Everything was reasonably uncomfortable on
those little boats.
Testing, one, two, three, testing. Testing, one,
two, three, testing. Yeah. We were picking up some
static someplace or what have you, but that's a lot
better. How large was Woods Hole, Woods Hole
roughly in terms of faculty then, I suppose? Well,
is it on? Yes, on. When I,
just after the people, just after the wartime when
people had left, it was probably, it was probably
very small. I don't know the number, but probably
the total number of people was less than a hundred.
And there were no, there was no tenure
appointments or anything like that. There were a
few people, maybe two or three, who had been
granted some kind of long-term contract, but
everybody else lived hand-to-mouth. The
contracts, the grants were negotiated almost
entirely by the director himself, so we didn't
have to write proposals all the time. And we felt
fairly, we felt reasonably secure, but being 25,
28 or something like that, it's not a big concern
if you're not married. And it was still operating
very much in the style of a of a summer vacation
laboratory with an increase of population in the
summer of maybe doubled, something of that sort.
So I would guess around 100, but maybe that's wrong
and most of those people really, no retirement
idea or any kind of commitment
of any part of the institution at all.
That took maybe eight or ten years to begin to take
place. Now, people at Scripps seemed to think that
there was more exchange among the faculty, more,
dealt with wider varieties of ideas rather than a
limited academic field in the 40s and the early 50s
because of the closeness of the faculty, the size
of the faculty. Was that your impression here at
Woods
Hole? You mean that there was more interchange
between different physicists? Right.
Biologists talked more to physicists who talked
more to mathematicians or whatever. Oh, I think
that's true. I think there was all being in one
building and having a common tea in the afternoon.
Always a lot of people from, there was only one tea.
You go around a place like this, I suppose there
must be 40 coffee pots in this institution today. I
suppose, well, the coffee pots weren't running
all day long, and there was one teapot in the
afternoon. And that, I think, made people
talk to each other about all that. And then there
were lots of interdisciplinary cruises. ship
time is a lot tighter than fewer ships, so people
got accustomed to each other's work that way. I
think the textbook by Spheredip Johnson and
Fleming is rather indicative of the way that all
the different aspects of oceanography are kind of
lumped together in one curriculum or one group of
people. I know. In my first days here, you see, in my
first days, when it was just beginning, I had a
smattering of work at Sea and Acoustics and
instrumentability.
I don't really match, but I had an expeditionary
work in meteorology. And I worked for a little
while, for a short time, with a biologist on,
Gordon Riley, on plankton models. So I had an
opportunity to play with meteorology, some
elementary chemistry, and plankton ideas, and
several aspects of oceanography, both in the
field and theoretical sort of things, all in those
first few years. But I think probably My fields of
interest have narrowed quite a bit since that
time. I don't do anything meteorology or biology.
It's partly the nature of the field, but it's also
partly living in next door offices with people
working in other disciplines. This whole side of
the building, for example, is all people
connected with current meters, one way or
another. I had to go upstairs to a chemist or down to
the other laboratory to see instruments or ships.
I don't even see ships out there. That's a
noticeable change. Do you feel the stanalgia
concerning the time when most oceanographers
were journalists? No, I don't. I think the nature
of science is much better now. I think science was
very exploratory
and thin. If you look at Sredip's book, you get an
idea how thin it is. I think one has a nostalgia for
any kind of thing to happen in the past, but it's not
very strong in me, and I think that the
sense of excitement and so forth is right now, this
feeling that the science has developed into
something interesting, something intricate
enough that makes it interesting to people in
other fields. We actually have in physical
oceanography now a pretty good connection with
people in hydrodynamics and fluid mechanical
people, even to some degree with astrophysicists
and astronomers, people who are interested in
fluids on a large scale other than the Earth, and
very good relations with meteorologists, more
than we had before. The subject, the theoretical
knowledge of the subject, the theoretical body of
knowledge of the subject has grown
tremendously from what it was in the 40s. There
weren't any models, there weren't any ideas of how
the ocean circulation went at that time, at least
with the very rare exception of the Ekrem's model.
which sat around sort of untouched
for something like 50 years. Heckman wrote his
spiral paper, I think in 1902 or maybe a little bit
earlier. Publications in about 1902. He didn't
actually go out and try to make any observations on
it. He wrote some very interesting papers in
between that are not very useful today. He didn't
go out to look for it until 1932. And he didn't
publish the results until 1954. He died in 1956.
So, I think that's about the approximate dates.
So, 52 years went between the time he wrote his
theoretical paper and the time he wrote his
analysis of an experimental results of the
attempt to measure the spiral. The results
weren't very good. I don't think the field could
wait so long. It's
amazing.
in terms of grant getting in the late 40s and the
early 50s, it seemed almost as if institutions
received sort of block grants, particularly here
at Lamont and Scripps, and sort of divided them up
among the various researchers. Yeah, I think it
wasn't really, yes, in effect it was like block
grants, but it was grants to directors, people who
had established a There were very, very few people
established in the government's eyes as
competition actors, and these people were people
like Smith and Ravel and Hisler and Ewing, and so
they made the major, they, it was, You could
imagine a German institution where there's a
chief professor who gets all the money and then
hands it out and tells people what to do. Well,
that's sort of the way it was here. The Islan got all
the money and he handed it out. He never asked you to
submit an estimated budget or anything like that.
He did all of that. If you needed some money, you'd
go and ask them, and generally it was worth coming.
Ship time, the same way. You never knew whether you
were going to have a ship or not. Someday, the whole
ship scheduling procedure was in his head, and
then he would come and say, you know, the advantage
will be available for a month or two weeks from
today. and we'd want to take her out, and that's the
kind of preparation you would have on a cruise. Of
course, you knew that that might happen, so you
were a little bit prepared. But it was like that,
largely through
one person, the director. The institution was
small, so it worked quite well, almost like a
project leader or something. And, of course, he
was an exceptionally nice man, and so it worked
very well without any kinds of friction or
unhappiness. People who were too big to live with a
system like that, like Ewing, they just had to go
start another laboratory somewhere else. They
couldn't take it that way, that kind of patronage,
and then they had to go somewhere else, and they
did. They started off their own outfits quite
nicely. The number of laboratories in this period
seemed to increase by leaps and bounds, with
Scripps and Woods Hole, of course, you know,
leading the way. But, gee, Washington, Oregon
State almost begins a few years later. Yes, but I
think the, I don't, I don't, that's interesting. I
don't know that the number of institutions grew
very fast. I don't, it'd be interesting to know
what the, how it went, but I think that they
probably There was a famous, well, after the war,
several years went by and oceanography was kind of
a low end, and then in the National Academy of
Sciences there was a report put together, I think
mostly under Harrison Brown, perhaps it was an
earlier one, and this had the This woke a lot of
people. This broke loose some money. A
lot of places started to, at that time, began to
start to set up institutions. Seattle had been
going for a long time,
probably before Woods Hole, on a very small
basis. But I think places, I don't know, I think
places like Texas A&M and Oregon State and
University of Miami and so forth really sort of
began to start in the mid-50s, I think. I don't
believe earlier than that. I think that's right. I
think so. And I think it was part and parcel of that
initiative which the Academy had taken in trying
to make this field more visible. I think it was the
mid-50s. And then the big flux of students began in
the early 60s, mid-60s. That's when the students,
when the educational programs began to get set up.
good students began to appear in the early 60s, but
a whole new generation began to appear as a result
of all these different places where they set up
their educational institutions. That's when the
new PhDs began to appear, but very few in 59 and 60.
There was a noticeable low period, I think, from
1948 to 1955, 56,
This would be roughly in the period when the ONR was
your major funder. Yes, it was. They kept the whole
thing alive for a long time. Did it seem to you they
were more interested then in research and
development than mission orientation? Oh, yeah,
they were much more. The ONR was extremely
generous about letting you do more or less
anything you wanted to do. It would be called
military oceanography, but it wasn't military
oceanography. It could be tracking the Gulf
Stream or tracking surface loads drifting
around. Just listening. ONR never really asked if
there was any need to justify things on the basis of
social needs or military needs. That never
filtered down, as far as I know, in that period,
1948 to 1950s. It never filtered down to the
individual investigators. Maybe the directors
had to cut some lines, but the individual
investigators never had to. So you didn't seem to
have any problem having your projects funded? No,
of course we were satisfied with very modest
funding. We're happy to have them. happy to have
salaries of around $3,000 a year. And if we had a
budget,
if we were going to buy some equipment and so forth,
and the budget came for something like $20,000
over a year, it couldn't be regarded as a very big
thing. So I'd rather have it long. How large
was the first grant you received? That's a good
question. I got grant money from ISM.
When did I try to, when did I first try to stand on my
own feet and write a grant? That's an interesting
question.
Probably,
probably around 1951 or 1952, I got some grant from
There were two grants. One was from the Atomic
Energy Commission for internal wave monitoring
thing off the river. The other was
from a special code in ONR, which I don't remember
what the name of the code ONR was, Naval Research
Code, for making some studies of the infrared
noise from the C-cells. And
those two things basically, I guess, eventually
led to the establishment of the Panularis station
data at Bermuda. That was the material wave that
led to that. going to lead to internal waste
because
we found that, oh, I remember, we told the AEC we
were going to make pressure measurements on the
slope of the river. It turned out that we were
unable to do that, so we made temperature
measurements instead, and then wrote out those
results as internal weight measurements. We
really didn't use all the cable they gave us. But
the, and then that eventually led to the Panoleros
stations at Bermuda, but the infrared thing began
to be quite a burden and so we asked, we found Bill
Richardson who was working at the Patel Institute
or something like that to come and take that
project over. And for some years we were flying
infrared detectors around the Gulf, over the Gulf
Stream. It never became a very a very useful tool
for industrial studies, but it was the one we tried
to make work. I guess 1951, 1952, those were
probably the first distinct projects that I got
separate from working under the resistance
programs, because I know certainly in 1953 and
1954, I was trying to do some other work under the
Morani resistance program.
Of course, I suppose really the time that I would
know, the time that I would actually know I was
writing my own proposals was certainly when I
started over at Harvard in 1960, then, because
then there wasn't any sheltering in the internal
environment. And it was probably before that. But
you're a relatively well-known oceanographer by
1951. Well, yeah, but it was a very small field and I
didn't have any great urge to build an empire or to
get out from under Islam or anything like that. It
was quite a comfortable, nice setup for me. I'd
forgotten when he gave up being the director and
Admiral Smith came in. But his was still around and
still, I think, understood the military
oceanography
program for quite some time. When did you first
meet Walter Munk? Well, that's an interesting
question.
I might have met him before 1949, but I think I met
him during the summer of 1949 is when I first met
him. I went out to Scripps, and I had just done my
little Gulf Stream model, I mean ocean model, and I
met him out there, and we talked about that, and
then I think he went that fall, it was the fall of 49,
to Norway, Bergen, for a sabbatical or something.
And that's funny, he did his 1950 paper. And then of
course there was a long period when I didn't know
him very well. He wanted us to get out of
oceanography for a period then. I don't know
exactly when, probably about 1953, 1968 or 65. It
was a period of maybe a little over 10 years when he
worked primarily on geophysical problems. Not
Oceans. So then, actually, I wasn't
really following very much what he was doing
there. Then we went to... Then, of course, I saw him
again in 1959 when we were there for the spring one
time.
We haven't ever done, never really did it very much
together. We did, I think maybe this one paper that
he and, Walter and I and Horowitz wrote on
internal weight measurements. I don't remember
the date of that. Probably 1956, 1955.
The question was rather, by the way, an unfair one
for this reason, is because he says that by the 50s,
he thinks you're doing the most important work in
oceanography being done. How would you answer
that? Well, that's very nice of him. Of course, he
was not working in the field, so I didn't have any
competition. But I don't think that's perhaps...
I don't think that's... Well, I mean, the point is
that there's very little being done. And I think
that's the real answer. Okay. So, but, you know,
the point is that then, you know, by 51 or 52, then,
you know, clearly you've established yourself in
this particular discipline as the leader. And so
I'm a little surprised about the way the grants are
operating then between 52 and 60. Yeah, but, I
mean, that's a personality problem. If you have
a... a nice comfortable arrangement in a
laboratory where the director's a nice guy and you
can
it's very easy to argue